---
data: 2022-10
type: paper
---
Covid-19 and poverty  

# [[fail#^fail-v-1|Falling]] [[the + adj.|the poor]] 

The [[pandemic]] has [[reverse#^reverse-v-1|reversed]] years of progress in reducing extreme poverty. Once again, politicians [[bear blame|bear]] much [[bear blame|blame]]

This coronavirus affects everyone, but not equally. The young often [[shrug off]] the virus; the old often die of it. The rich [[shrug off]] the economic shock; the poor cannot. Because of covid-19, the number of extremely poor people ([[ie]], those making less than $1.90 a day) will rise by 70m-100m this year, the World Bank [[predict|predicts]]. Using a broader measure, including those who lack basic shelter or clean water and children who go hungry, [[the ranks]] of the poor will swell by 240m-490m this year, says the UN. That could [[reverse#^reverse1|reverse]] almost a decade of progress. If a [[vaccine]] is found, economies will no [[doubt]] [[bounce back]]. But widespread vaccination will take years and the very poor cannot wait that long. By then, [[malnutrition]] will have [[stunt|stunted]] a [[tragic]] number of children’s bodies and minds. 

Governments in rich countries have spent over 10% of GDP to ease the economic pain. Others cannot be so ambitious. [[emerging economies]] have spent just 3%, and the poorest nations less than 1%. [[safety-nets]] in low-income countries are [[cobweb]][[-thin]]. Governments there have [[hand out|handed out]] only $4 extra per person on social programmes—in total, not per day.   

[[donor|Donors]] should help. Rich countries are [[on course to]] cut [[direct]] aid by a third [[compared with]] last year. The IMF and World Bank have raised [[lending]], but only 31% more of the bank’s money has reached poor countries, says the Centre for Global Development, a [[think-tank]], about half the increase in the global financial [[crisis]], a much smaller shock.  

Governments in poor countries, [[meanwhile]], need to spend their money wisely. Too many offer [[pork]] for[[chum| chums]] and [[crumb|crumbs]] for the poor. Since the [[crisis]] began, Mexico has provided no new programmes for the [[hard-up]] but has given Pemex, the state oil [[giant]], tax breaks worth $2.7bn, or $21 per Mexican. India has poured $7bn down [[coal]] [[mine|mines]]. South Africa is expected soon to confirm another wasteful effort to keep its [[money-losing]] airline [[aloft]]. Even when money is earmarked for good ends, it is too often wasted or stolen. South African investigators are [[prob|probing]] possible [[fraud]] in 658 [[contract|contracts]] worth $300m for [[covid-fighting]] [[kit]]. Nigeria’s health ministry bought some masks for $53 each. In a leaked recording, a voice [[allegedly]] belonging to a Ugandan official [[guffaw|guffaws]] as she and her colleagues appear to [[plot to do sth.|plot to]] [[pocket]] money meant for alleviating suffering in the [[pandemic]].  

The best way to help the poor is to give them money directly. The simplicity of this policy makes it less [[be vulnerable to|vulnerable to]] [[corruption]]. With a little extra [[cash]] in their pockets, [[recipient|recipients]] can feed their children and send them back to school. They can avoid a [[fire-sale]] of [[asset#^asset-n-2|assets]], such as a [[motorbike-taxi]] or a cow, that will help them make a living in the future. One country that has done well getting [[cash]] into poor pockets is Brazil, [[despite]] President Jair Bolsonaro’s habit of [[downplay|downplaying]] the effects of covid-19. Various measures of poverty there have actually fallen, largely because the government has sent $110 per month for three months to the [[impecunious]], helping 66m people. A [[priority]] for governments should be basic health care, which the [[pandemic]] has [[disrupt|disrupted]] so badly that vaccination rates for children have been [[set back]] about 20 years.  

The [[crisis]] requires politicians to make hard choices quickly. Mistakes are inevitable, given how much remains unknown about the disease. But some are [[inexcusable]]. India’s sudden lockdown threw millions of migrant workers out of their urban jobs and lodgings, forcing them to head back to their villages on foot or crowded trains, spreading the virus [[far and wide]]. South Africa [[bar from|barred]] people [[bar from|from]] leaving home at night but then [[evict|evicted]]tens of thousands of [[squatter|squatters]] from [[shack|shacks]] on public land, with no place to go. Politicians governing remotely from their comfortable home offices should think harder about how their decisions might affect those whom covid-19 is [[plunge into |plunging]] back [[plunge into |into]] [[dire]] poverty. It is shameful when their responses to the [[pandemic]] add to the suffering of the least fortunate.